---
layout: default
title: MSREACT Keywords
parent: Command Line Keyword Documentation
grand_parent: Documentation
nav_order: 1
summary: "The list of available command line arguments for MSREACT."
permalink: /page/documentation/msreact.html
---

# {{page.title}}
{: .no_toc }

This page contains the documentation of available keywords for the MSREACT mode.
Required arguments will be marked with `< >`, optional arguments are marked by brackets `[ ]`.

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}


---

{% include note.html content="Note that the MSREACT mode produces many topologically equivalent duplicates. To sort out duplicated structures you require the `molbar` program that can be obtained from the respective [*molbar* GitHub repository <i class='fa-brands fa-github'></i>](https://git.rwth-aachen.de/bannwarthlab/molbar) (recommended option). Alternatively, you can use InChI keys generated by the `obabel` program [*openbabel* GitHub repository <i class='fa-brands fa-github'></i>](https://github.com/openbabel). The programs have to be added to your path as `molbar` or `obabel`, respectively." %}

The MSREACT extension of CREST can be invoked via the command line. 
To activate MSREACT, use a command similar to

```bash
crest <INPUTFILE> -msreact [OPTIONS]
```

The input file coordinates have to be provided and can be in any format supported by CREST. 
The general and technical command line options of CREST also apply to the MSREACT runtype 
(see [**Keyword Documentation**]({{site.baseurl}}/page/documentation/keywords.html)).
Take care to always set the number of cores with `--T <INT>`.
The `[OPTIONS]` that can be used in conjunction with `-msreact` are documented below.
{: .text-justify }

## MSREACT Keywords

{% include 2tab.html obj=site.data.msreact.msreactkeywords %}

## MSREACT special settings specified in an input file

Additional `[OPTIONS]` can be changed in an additional input file which is read via `-msinput <filename>`. The specific keywords are documented below. One should use only one `keyword <value>` pair per line.
{: .text-justify }

{% include 2tab.html obj=site.data.msreact.msreactinputfilekeywords %}

